Hello, everybody.
Thank you so much for coming.
This is Auto Save and
Versions in Mac OS X Lion.
My name is Tony Parker,
and I'm an engineer on the
Cocoa Frameworks team at Apple.
So today we're going to talk about
three of the great new features
you've been hearing about in Lion.
Auto Save, where we free the user from
having to worry about manually
saving their document.
Versions,
which allows the user to go back
further in time than just the last
version that they've saved on disk.
And finally,
we'll talk about iCloud integration.
And we'll talk about how you
can adopt each of these features
in your application and really
become a first class Lion citizen.
So all of these features are
integrated into your application in
Cocoa via the NSDocument architecture.
So first, I'm going to talk a little bit
about the basics of NSDocument,
and then we'll move on to
those three new features.
So here are three examples of
a document-based application.
There's Numbers, Pages, and Keynote,
of course.
And in these applications,
and in applications like them,
the user will open up a document,
make changes,
perhaps share them with other people,
save those changes,
and print them and do other things.
So a counter example to a
document-based application would
be something like iPhoto or iTunes,
where we call those shoebox applications.
Maybe the user has thousands of
files on disk that are managed
through a single window interface.
So if you're not using NSDoctument yet,
let me show you a few of the
features that you get for free
when you adopt NSDoctument.
There is everything in this file menu.
We, of course,
let you create new documents,
open existing documents,
and NSDoctument integrates
with the Open and Save panel.
We manage the Open Recent menu for you,
and that includes integrating with
system preferences and respecting
the user's preferences for how many
documents they want to display there.
You can, of course, close documents.
And for Auto Save applications,
we now have Save a Version, Duplicate,
and Revert to Saved will
open up the version's UI.
NSDocument also provides
support for printing.
Every document, of course,
is going to have at least one window.
And here you see one example.
And the window is integrated
with the Save panel as well.
And in this example,
I am saving this document
to my Documents folder.
And to manage those windows,
NSDocument works with NSWindow and
NSWindowController to allow the
user to manage the windows in terms
of what order they are on screen
and minimizing and zooming them.
Under the hood, NSDocument provides a
lot more features too.
There's integration with Undo
Manager and tracking of the
edited state of the document.
In Auto Save applications,
that will show up as the
new edited indication near
the title of the document.
And for non-Auto Save applications,
that includes the dirty
dot in the close button.
NSDocument also does Safe Save for you.
That is where we atomically save the
document by writing it to the side
and then swapping it in as a last
step so that the user's data is safe
even if a failure occurs during save.
And NSDoctument will present
errors to the user in the form
of sheets and take care of that
kind of presentation for you.
Now, new in Lion, we've added a ton of
features to NSDocument.
That includes support for sandboxing,
support for file coordination,
which is a new technology we have
in Lion for serializing access
to files between applications,
support for duplicating documents,
of course, Auto Save and Versions and
Cloud Document Storage,
including using the versions UI to
resolve conflicts that may occur.
The basic architecture of
NSDocument has three main classes:
NSDocumentController, NSWindowController,
and NSDocument.
So let's look at each of these classes
briefly and some of their key methods.
NSDocumentController's job is to create,
open, track,
and manage all of the documents
that an application has open.
It is typically not subclassed
and is a singleton object,
so you get one using the
sharedDocumentController
method on the class there.
And because it manages
the list of documents,
you can ask it for a list of
all documents that are open.
and his document controller is
also responsible for starting the
job of creating a new document
using this new document method,
that's a message that's sent when the
user chooses New from the File menu,
and also for handling the process
of starting opening documents
using methods like this one,
which is New in Lion and allows
a completion handler to be
called when the open is finished.
NSWindowController's job is to manage
one window associated with a document.
In contrast to NSDocumentController,
it is typically
customized by subclassing.
There are two interesting methods,
initWithWindowNibNameOwner,
that lets you specify the nib file
that contains the user interface that
you want to display for your document,
and the document that's associated
with the WindowController.
and finally we have NSDocument itself.
Its job is to represent,
store and load persistent data.
And really it's about where
you put your logic to make your
document-based application unique.
Now in contrast to some of the other
classes in the Cocoa frameworks,
it is customized by subclassing,
not by delegation.
And you always subclass it
to add your functionality.
When you subclass NSDocument,
you have your choice of methods
to override to put that logic.
And here are two examples.
Read from data of type error
and data of type error.
The first one,
you were given an NSData object
that contains the state of your
document as it existed on disk.
And your job in your implementation is
to take that data and make your in-memory
representation of your document.
Data of type error is
the opposite of that,
where you create the data from
the in-memory representation.
And we'll take that data and
serialize it to disk for you.
Thank you.
and his document is
also a controller class.
So when the user chooses
Save from the File menu,
then it receives this
Save Document message.
And we also keep track of properties
of the document using methods like
File URL and IsDocumentEdited.
So let's look at a graph to
see how this fits together.
And as Document Controller,
our Singleton instance
is there at the top.
This application has two
document subclasses and two
documents that are open.
There's an RTF document
and a plain text document.
and each of these document subclasses
has their own window controllers,
and of course the window
controllers manage the windows.
And you can see that it's perfectly
acceptable for a document to have
more than one window open that
points to the same document contents.
Another way to understand how
NSDoctument works is looking at the
message flow that occurs between
these three key classes when you
perform certain kinds of activities.
So first, let's look at what happens
when you open a document.
So in the NSDocumentController,
it's going to receive the
Open Document message because the
user has chosen the Open menu item.
Oh, and here we're going to go
through some of the key methods,
not every method involved,
just the key ones.
So once the user has chosen
one or more documents,
because of course you can open many
documents from that Open panel,
we get the list of URLs they chose by
calling URLs from running Open panel.
And for each of those documents,
we will open them,
starting with Open Document with
contents of URL display error.
Now, these documents can be of any of the
types that your application supports,
so we need to find out what kind
of NSDocument subclass to use.
We figure that out and type
for contents of URL error.
And then finally,
we call make document with contents of
URL of type error to begin the process
of creating the NSDocument subclass.
So here it's a MyRTF document.
Now, in that class,
we're going to initialize it, of course,
using init with contents of URL.
And then we're going to call
read from URL of type error.
And that will begin the process
of reading the document.
That starts with read
from URL of type error,
which we'll call read from
file wrapper of type error,
or read from data of type error,
depending on which of those two methods
you've overridden in your subclass.
Next,
we add the document to the list that
the NSDocument controller is managing,
make the window controllers,
including calling init
with window nibname owner,
and then finally,
show the windows associated
with the document.
All right.
Let's look at a second example that is
what happens when you save a document.
So here, let's assume that the document
has been named by the user,
and they've chosen
Save from the File menu.
And this document will receive
the Save Document message.
That, in turn,
will call Saved URL of type for
Save Operation Completion Handler.
The URL we already know because
the document has been named.
The type we already know because
of the kind of document it is.
The Save Operation parameter can be Save,
Save As, Auto Save.
There's a few different options there.
and that completion handler again will
be called when the save is finished.
The first step of saving is
calling WriteSafelyToURLofType
for SaveOperationError,
and this is where NSDoctument
implements the safe save logic
that we give you for free.
Part of WritingSafely
is WriteToURLofType for
SaveOperationOriginalContentsURLError,
which will then call
WriteToURLofTypeError,
which calls DataOfTypeError
or FileWrapperOfTypeError,
depending again on which
one you've overwritten.
So the key point here is that, of course,
you, again,
you customize NSDocument by subclassing.
And when you subclass,
you can override at any point along this
list of save methods or write methods,
and in a similar fashion
when you open documents.
Now, when you override at the
beginning of this list,
at the top,
you can put more custom behavior
into the NSDocument architecture
because you're cutting off a lot
of the functionality below it.
The flip side of that, of course,
is that the more, the lower the method on
this list you override is,
the more functionality you get for free.
And when we add document
features to NSDocument,
like Auto Save, Versions,
and iCloud integration,
the lower you are in this list,
the easier it is for your application
to adopt those new features.
So we recommend that when
subclassing NSDocument,
you start at the bottom and only
work your way up if you find
that you need something only
available at the previous level.
Okay, with the basics out of the way,
let's talk about the
first major new feature,
and that's Auto Save.
So here you see an example of
an Auto Saving application.
The edited menu in the middle there
allows the user additional options
that they didn't have before.
And really, Auto Save is about saving
automatically at key times.
[Transcript missing]
We wanted to make Auto Save as
easy to enable in your application
as it is for users to use it.
So to turn it on and get
a ton of functionality,
you only need to override
one method in NSDocument,
and that's Auto Saves in Place,
Return Yes.
And when you turn this on,
just try it out.
If you take one thing
away from this talk,
I want you to put this method in
your NSDocuments subclass and see how
much functionality you get for free.
This enables Auto Save,
this enables versions,
it adds a whole host of behaviors
that we're going to talk about soon.
So it's really simple,
just that one method.
And of course,
you should try it out in your
application and see what happens.
And to show us what
happens in an example app,
I'd like to invite my colleague
Kevin Perry up to give us a quick demo.
Good afternoon, I'm Kevin Perry,
another engineer on the
Cocoa Frameworks team.
And here we have the
classic sample app sketch.
And this is before we've done
any modifications for Lion.
And so when I edit a document,
The contents that you see
of the document on screen,
we typically think of that as being
different than the document on disk.
and David are going to talk about how to
use the Dirty Dot in the Closed button.
We indicate this state to the
user with the Dirty Dot that's
up here in the Closed button.
And again, when you close the document,
we ask you, do you want to save this
before you close the document?
All this happens because we put the
responsibility of saving on the user.
So let me show you how we can give
responsibility for saving instead to the
framework and free that from the user.
So like Tony said,
all we need to do here in our
NSDocument subclass is override
Auto Saves in place and return yes.
So let me just enable that and we'll run.
So now when I edit a document,
you can start to think about
what's on screen being the same
as what's on disk at all times.
We indicate this state to the
user in a different way in Lion,
specifically this edited
indication in the title bar.
This is helpful not only to know
when you've edited your document,
but in case you make
an accidental change,
you can notice that and either undo your
changes or revert to a previous version.
Also,
now when we close a changed document,
an edited document,
You're not warned about saving.
The framework has either already
done it or does it when we close
the document so the user doesn't
even have to think about it.
Like Tony showed you before,
there are also some changes to
the File menu to adapt to this
new mental model of saving.
Instead of Save, we have Save a Version.
Instead of Save As, we have Duplicate.
Instead of Save a Copy As,
we have Export.
And Revert to Saved
brings you into Versions,
where you're able to browse
previous versions of your document,
You can even select and copy
something from a previous version
and paste it in the current one.
or you can choose to completely replace
the current version with a previous one.
So this is a lot of great functionality
you can get with very little
code in your document subclass.
And again, as Tony said,
we encourage you just to go try
it out and see how it works.
I'll show you a little bit later
how a little bit more code can
get you even more great features.
Now back to Tony.
Thanks, Kevin.
So you can see just that one
method and all that functionality
completely for free in Sketch.
Now, as easy as it is to turn on,
there are still a few things you can
do to really polish the Auto Save user
experience once you've enabled it.
We're going to talk about being
smart about when you save,
allowing the user to cancel
certain kinds of saves,
and a major new feature in
NSDocument in Lion to allow
saving on background threads.
So first, being smart about when to save.
So as we mentioned,
NSDoctument will save at key times
and trigger an Auto Save when
the application quits,
when the document is closed.
Of course,
we need to make sure the contents are
safe before the application goes away.
We also Auto Save when the user
switches away from your application,
and that's because it seems like a
good time to avoid interrupting the
user and making sure the document
is consistent with what's on disk.
In Lion,
we still have the Auto Save timer
that you're familiar with
from Snow Leopard and earlier.
However, we've improved it.
So now it automatically readjusts
itself based on user activity.
So the idea is that the timer
will not fire while the user is
actively editing their document.
We also save before the user reverts,
and the reason is because we need
to keep the current contents in
case they change their mind about
the revert they've just done.
And a key point here,
your application can also
trigger an auto save.
You just call the save methods
with that auto save operation type.
Now, you know your application best.
We've done some key points here.
But if you know of a place in
your application or a time in your
application where you can save
without interrupting the user,
then go ahead and do it yourself too.
So part of being smart about when you
save is adoption of file coordination.
Now as I mentioned,
file coordination is a new technology
in Lion that serializes access
to files between applications.
And if you use NSDocument,
you're in luck.
We implemented it all for you.
That means that we will
Auto Save automatically when a read
is requested and notify you and reread
the contents when a write is completed.
So an example of the former
is if you mail a document,
then mail may ask your application to
please save right now so that we can have
a consistent version of the document.
And another example of the latter
there is if iCloud has synced a
new version of your document down,
we need to make sure the user sees
on screen what exists on disk.
File coordination is such a
key technology to Auto Save,
Versions, and iCloud support that we have
an entire talk devoted to it.
It's called Taking Advantage
of File Coordination.
It's in this room right after this talk.
So the second method of polishing
the Auto Save user experience
is to spend less time saving.
So with Auto Save enabled, of course,
we are going to save much more
frequently than in the past.
And the key point is to
avoid interrupting the user.
The last thing we want is for users
to use Auto Save enabled applications
and feel like their entire time
they're spent staring at a beach ball.
So one way you can do that is
to only save what's changed.
And one way you can only save what's
changed is to use NSFileWrapper.
NSFileWrapper stores the resources
in their most natural format,
and it allows quick copies.
That's because the user
is probably editing,
say, the text component of your
document and not the movie,
audio, or picture file.
So we can change only the text part,
and the other resources can be used
-- we can use hard links to make sure
that they're not copied unnecessarily.
If you have a monolithic
flat file format,
then the whole thing has
to be written every time.
NSFileWrapper helps
you with that problem.
So there's another method to
avoid interrupting the user,
and that's what we call
a cancelable Auto Save.
So to explain what it is,
first let me tell you what
a normal Auto Save is.
That happens when the application quits
or when the document closes or if it's
been too long since the last save.
And the reason for that last one
is because we want to make sure the
user doesn't starve our readjusting
timer and avoid -- prevent
the document from being saved.
But the other kind of save then,
Auto Save,
is an implicitly cancelable Auto Save.
And right now in Lion,
we trigger those only based
on the Auto Save timer.
So the idea here is that, you know,
because the timer readjusts itself,
we can try to put off saving while the
user is interacting with their document.
But clearly we can't see the future.
So if the user edits the
document and then waits,
then the timer fires,
and then they decide to
interact with the document,
we want to avoid interrupting
them in that case,
too.
So we can do that via this new technique.
So here's an example of
how you might use it.
In my write to URL of time,
I'm going to type error implementation.
While I'm saving, I'm going to do some
work related to the save.
And then every so often check to see if
auto saving is implicitly cancelable.
If it is, then we should also
check for user activity.
And the implementation of
that function is going to be
highly application dependent.
One example of what you might do could
include running the main run loop,
looking for user events,
and then if you see one,
decide that now might be
a good time to cancel.
Once you've decided that
it's appropriate to cancel,
you should abort the save.
And then you can go back
to the main run loop,
look for user events,
by creating a new error, NSError,
excuse me, error with domain,
Cocoa error domain,
ns Cocoa error domain,
and the ns user canceled error,
and then return no from this method.
It's important to use the Cocoa error
domain and the user canceled error,
because what happens is that when you
return no and you use that kind of error,
ns document will unwind the
save and avoid presenting the
user with an error that says,
hey, you just canceled a save.
The whole point was to do it silently.
So use this particular
error domain and code.
So next we have this major
new feature in NSDocument,
which is support for asynchronous saving.
And we've tried to make it as easy
to enable as Auto Saving itself.
You can see here you override, again,
one method in your NSDocument subclass.
It's called can asynchronously
write to URL of type for save
operation and then return yes.
And of course,
because there's some parameters there,
you have a choice about what kind
of save operations or type of
documents you want to support saving.
We recommend you support
as many as possible.
So to show you why it's important
to use asynchronous auto saving,
let's look at what happens
during a synchronous auto save.
The user edits the document,
and that timer will start,
because the document is now
dirty and needs to be saved.
And at some point, the timer will fire,
and the user must wait.
[Transcript missing]
Here are the methods involved.
The save operation will start on the
main thread using saved URL of type
for save operation completion handler.
At that time, the main thread will block.
The saving will be started on
the background thread starting
with write safely to URL of
type for save operation error.
And then after the background thread has
snapshotted the contents of the document,
it should allow the main thread to
continue using unblock user interaction.
And the background thread
will finish saving.
And that write and finish step can
take a long time on NSDocument.
So,
we can have a huge win by adopting this.
When we introduce
asynchrony into Auto Saving,
there are a couple of concerns.
The first is that there are
two categories of resources
that need to be serialized.
The first is the user.
Anything that may present UI to
the user must be serialized.
That includes saving, reverting,
duplicating, printing,
or any other activities
that your application does.
The second category is file access.
And things in that
category include the URL,
the modification date of the file,
the on-disk contents of the file,
and the edited state of the document,
because the edited state compares,
in a way, the on-disk contents to
the in-memory contents.
So we have a way for you to coordinate
between threads when you're doing saves
and using these kinds of activities.
The first is if the main thread needs
to present something to the user,
and only the main thread may
present anything to the user,
of course.
You should surround that work
with perform activity with
synchronous waiting using block.
The first parameter is
a hint to the app kit.
Tell us whether or not this method
should return or not before that
block parameter is executed.
If you're up on your block syntax,
you can see that the block parameter
takes a block parameter of its own.
That's called the activity
completion handler.
In your block,
you put the work that you need to be
done that may present UI to the user,
and before you leave that block,
you should call the
activity completion handler.
If any thread, main or otherwise,
needs access to the document file on disk
or any of the properties of that file,
you should do that work
within one of these methods.
Perform synchronous file access
using block and perform asynchronous
file access using block.
And you see the second one also
takes a completion handler block.
and David . Let's see
how you might use those.
Here is an example of
asynchronous file access.
Let's say your application
has a requirement that as
soon as the save is finished,
we have to compress the contents of
that document and then copy it to
another place on the file system.
That is clearly work that doesn't need
to block the user from interacting with
the document and it could take a while,
so it seems like a great candidate
to do on a background thread.
So let's do that.
We will start a background operation
and on that background thread,
we will start asynchronous file
access using those methods.
Inside the block,
we are going to perform that background
work and then we are going to call
the completion handler and make sure
that we end asynchronous file access.
And in this way,
we ensure that the main thread
does not touch the file at the same
time as the background thread is.
Another potential thing to be concerned
about when you're using asynchronous
saving is the potential of deadlock
since we have these serialized resources.
And we need to make sure that
we coordinate access between
user activities and file access.
So what I mean is that you should
use these NSDoctument methods.
The first is called continue asynchronous
work on main thread using block.
This is for file access work.
And the second is called
continue activity using block,
and that's for user
activity kind of work.
So I'll explain by way
of another example.
So let's say that after saving,
we're going to calculate the file
size of the newly saved document.
And we're going to do that work
on a background thread too.
And once we're done,
we're going to display that value
to the user in an inspector panel.
And of course, that's main thread work
because it's displaying UI.
So let's take a first stab.
In my background operation,
I'll start asynchronous file access.
And inside that block,
I calculate the file size.
But before it's done,
the user decides to go ahead
and duplicate the document.
Well, duplicating a document requires
file access as well because we
need to make sure that we have the
current contents of the document.
So we start asynchronous file
access on the main thread.
And then the background thread says,
okay, I'm going to run this stuff on the
main thread using perform selector
on thread or NSOperation main queue
or any kind of technology like that.
And at this point,
we've wound up in a state of deadlock.
And the reason is because the background
thread is waiting on the main thread.
To do the UI work.
And the main thread is waiting
on the background thread to give
up its asynchronous file access.
So don't do this.
Instead, use those NS document
methods I just talked about.
We're going to use continue
asynchronous work on main thread.
And this document is smart enough
to figure out that that work must be
allowed to continue to avoid a deadlock.
So the update user interface that the
background thread wanted will complete.
And the background thread is allowed
to end its asynchronous file access.
Which, of course,
will allow the main thread to
finish its duplicate work and
end the synchronous file access.
So we avoided the deadlock scenario.
Okay.
Oh, yes, do that with the check mark.
So, to give us a demo of how
you can adopt some of these
Auto Save polishing techniques,
I'd like to invite back Kevin.
Let's go back to Sketch and
enable asynchronous saving.
Sketch implements the data of
type error method that Tony talked
about earlier in such a way that,
you know, it's thread safe.
So all we need to do to enable
asynchronous saving is...
and David Override can asynchronously
write to URL of type for save
operation and return yes.
This causes the data of type error method
to be invoked on a background thread.
However, NSData doesn't know,
NSDocument doesn't know implicitly
that our implementation of
this method is thread safe.
And so, as Tony mentioned before,
we have to block the main thread
until this method returns,
because this is the
prepare step of the save.
Normally this won't be a problem.
If you just have a few graphics
in your Sketch document,
the serialization into NNS data and
the writing to a relatively fast
file system won't take a noticeable
amount of time to the user.
However, if you have many graphics
in your document,
this won't scale so well because
the user will start to notice that
it's taking a long time to serialize
all these graphics into NNS data and
they may encounter the wait cursor.
Let's simulate this.
by inserting a good old sleep
at the end of this method.
So we've enabled asynchronous saving
and our data of type error method
is going to take a long time to run.
So now when we make a change to
this document and force a save,
you notice we're having to wait.
And boom, wait cursor.
Not a great experience.
However,
we can do a lot better than this by
using unblock user interaction to
make the prepare step a lot shorter.
In order to call unblock
user interaction,
we need to make sure that what
we're doing on this background
thread won't conflict with what's
potentially happening on the main
thread while the user is continuing
to interact with the document.
The data that we need to
generate the NSData object is
this graphics array right here.
However, this array is not only mutable,
but its contents are mutable as well.
or we can snapshot this document
state by making a deep copy,
like so.
Now that we have this document snapshot,
we know that this array and its contents
are not going to change even while
the user is continuing to interact
with the document on the main thread.
So let's go ahead and use this
array everywhere it was used before.
So now that we have this snapshot,
we can call self-unblock
user interaction,
which will unblock the main
thread immediately and allow
the user to continue interacting
with the document much sooner.
So now when I make a change and save,
you see I'm still able to
interact with the application,
even make edits and so forth.
And then sometime in the background,
after that five second sleep completes,
the save is done and the
user didn't even notice it.
Thank you.
So let's go ahead and now
add a new feature to Sketch.
Tony mentioned it.
A file size field here in the inspector.
You see I've added.
And every time a save completes,
we want to update this with the
current size of the document's file.
and we want to do this in a way that is,
we don't want to block the main thread
as we're accessing the file system,
since that is proper behavior.
And we also want to avoid the
potential deadlock that can happen
that Tony talked about before.
So, first thing we need is to
know when saving completes.
And we can do that by overriding
save to URL of type for save
operation completion handler.
And if we call super,
we'll pass in all the same arguments,
but we have a special
completion handler of our own.
After we call the normal
completion handler,
We're going to want to go onto a
different thread so that we can perform
our file access in a way that won't
block the main thread potentially.
We can use that using NSOperationQueue,
add operation with block.
We also need to make sure that we're
the only ones accessing the file at
this particular time so that the answer,
the file size,
doesn't change unexpectedly
out from under us.
So we can use perform asynchronous
file access using block.
Once we're inside this block,
we have that exclusive
access to the file.
So now we're safe to
access the file system
and get the file size.
We do that using NSURLs,
get resource value with the
NSURL total file size key.
In this case, we just have a single file.
So we don't need to
do any more than this.
Now that we have the new file size,
let's update the UI.
We can't do it on this thread
because we can only update
the UI from the main thread.
So how do we get back to the main thread?
Well, you might think NSOperationQueue
or PerformSelectorOnThread
or something like that.
But like Tony mentioned before,
we're still holding on
to this file access.
And if something on the main thread
in the meantime has attempted
to get that file access and is
waiting for us to relinquish it,
and we just call something
on the main thread,
we're going to end up with a deadlock.
In this case,
you may argue that this is simple enough
that we could just relinquish file access
before calling onto the main thread,
and you might be right.
But in some cases,
you're not gonna be able to do that.
You're gonna need to hold on to exclusive
file access until you're done with all
your work on the main thread as well.
So let's work under that assumption now.
In order to avoid the deadlock,
instead of using Dispatch
Async or NSOperation Queue
or any of those technologies,
we're going to use NSDocument's
continue asynchronous work
on main thread using block.
Like Tony showed you,
this is able to resolve the
deadlock and have this block
invoked on the main thread,
even if something else is waiting
on the main thread for file access.
Now that we're safely on the main thread,
we can update the UI by
updating our IVAR and sending
the proper KVO notifications.
I've set up bindings between
the inspector and the document.
Last but not least,
we need to make sure that we call
the file access completion handler,
or else something else that comes in
in the meantime and tries to get file
access will end up waiting forever.
So now let me show you this.
I'll make another change to the document,
force a save,
and after our five seconds of wait time,
We see that the file size
is updated here in the UI.
Remember, we did this in a way that
prevents accessing the file
system from the main thread,
which could cause unexpected,
unpredictable blocking.
And we also prevented,
avoided the deadlock that can happen when
continuing that work on the main thread.
So let's move back to the
topic of asynchronous saving.
And I made some measurements
to show you just how beneficial
asynchronous saving can be.
I created on my machine
a 10,000 graphic sketch.
And with synchronous saving,
this took about .676 seconds.
Not too long, but, you know,
as you add more graphics,
this will get even larger.
Just by turning on asynchronous saving,
I was able to reduce
this to 0.649 seconds.
Now, that doesn't seem like
a huge improvement.
However,
I was on a very fast file system,
my local hard drive.
If I was working on something
like a network-mounted volume,
this could take arbitrarily
longer to complete the save.
And in the synchronous case,
the user would have to wait
for the entire duration.
With the asynchronous case,
since we're just waiting until the
datative type error method returns,
The amount of time doesn't change at all.
So the potential gains from using
asynchronous saving are much greater.
However,
by snapshotting the document state and
calling unblock use interaction early,
we're actually able to reduce the
amount of time that the user had
to wait to a dramatic .011 seconds.
Thank you.
So I hope this is a good example
of how valuable it is to not
only turn on asynchronous saving,
but go the extra mile and snapshot
your document state so that you can
unblock the user as soon as possible.
So that when an Auto Save happens
while the user is in the middle
of interacting with the document,
they don't have to wait suddenly
for that Auto Save to complete.
All right,
we're going to go back to Tony now,
who's going to talk to us
about some more cool features.
Thanks, Kevin.
Okay, let's move on to versions.
So, again, here is the UI that you've
seen many times by now.
Of course, there's a two-up interface,
one current document, one old document,
and many old documents behind it.
We have our done and restore
buttons along the bottom and
the timeline along the right.
So, this interface and versions in
general is designed to expand
the number of options the user
has for reverting their document.
They can go way further back in
time than was previously possible,
and they can also do a
kind of selective revert,
as you've seen in a few demos already,
including Kevin's,
where you can copy something from
the old document because it's a
fully live document file and then
paste it into the current document.
Furthermore,
the versions browser protects
against unintentional change.
So if you open up a file
and make some changes to it,
and then change your mind,
you can always get back to
the state as you left it by
using the versions browser.
Under the hood,
version uses compressed storage.
So if your file changes
by just a few bytes,
we're not going to store an
entirely new copy of the file.
And NSDocument will automatically
manage the list of versions for you.
So by that I mean that NSDocument
may create a version for an hour ago,
two hours ago, or three hours ago,
but it will also automatically
purge old versions.
So a year ago plus an hour, two,
and three hours,
we probably don't need to
keep all four of those,
so we can reduce that down to one.
So that kind of logic NSDocument
does automatically for you.
And furthermore,
the Versions Browser is the first
way for your Cocoa application to
be integrated with Time Machine.
So if we run out of versions that
are stored on the local disk,
we're going to go ahead and
look on backup disks as well for
older versions of that document.
And if we find them,
they're displayed right in
line in the UI as just another
version of the document.
So, Versions is on by default when
you enable Auto Saving in place,
but like Auto Save,
there are a couple things you can do to
polish the version's user experience.
The first is to adopt
asynchronous document opening,
or concurrent document opening.
This is a feature that
we added in Snow Leopard,
and I'm not going to go into a
lot of detail about it today,
but we are opening many
copies of the document,
so if we can open them at the
same time instead of serially,
that's a big win for
browsing in Versions.
You can also show only the relevant
controls in the Versions browser.
We allow you a mechanism to resize
the windows in the Versions browser
to their best viewing dimensions,
and we have a new technique
for allowing what we call
"discardable changes." So first,
let's talk about showing
a different interface.
So as you can tell,
the Versions UI is about
providing a focused interface,
and that means that we want to
allow the user to see as much
of their document as possible,
not necessarily edit as much
of their document as possible.
So you can participate in this
and improve the experience of
your app in Versions by hiding
things like toolbars or inspectors.
You can also add a new interface
that may not be fully relevant to the
experience of looking at the content.
You can do that in a few ways.
Here's one.
Listen for these notifications
that are posted when the Versions
browser enters and exits.
We have NSWindow will enter a
Versions browser notification
and a similar did exit.
You can also find out if
certain kinds of controls should
be just flat out disabled.
If you're looking at the
document on the right here,
it is in what we call viewing mode.
Viewing mode documents are
not allowed to be edited.
So if you have something
which is purely for editing,
you can find out if your document
is in that mode and just go
ahead and disable it right away.
To participate in resizing the
windows for that interface,
you can use this
NSWindow delegate method.
Window will resize for version
browser with Mac's preferred size,
Mac's allowed size.
So, you know,
versions has this two-up user interface.
And to show two documents at a time,
we would show two documents
at the Mac's preferred size.
And we also have a Mac's allowed size,
which is the maximum size until we,
let me say that a different way.
The screen size is not
the maximum allowed size.
We need to leave room
for the user interface.
So, the Mac's allowed size is the maximum
size of one NSDocument window.
And if your document is larger
than the preferred size and
less than the allowed size,
we scale it in the user interface so
that it fits in the two-up interface.
And then when the user begins
to interact with that window,
we scale it back up again so
they can see it at full size.
So, this method lets you participate
in deciding what the size
of your window should be.
New in Lion, we also have a way to allow
changes to certain kinds of
changes to viewing mode documents.
The reason you need it is because
changes to viewing mode documents
are automatically undone if
the change is discardable.
The reason is we don't want to allow
the user to attempt to edit the past.
That's not something that's possible.
If you need to allow the change,
then the change must be discardable.
Discardable changes are
normally auto saved,
but on locked or viewing mode documents,
they may be discarded without warning.
So another example, in Keynote,
the currently selected slide,
as well as the hidden or shown
state of a group of slides,
is something that is both undoable
and preserved in the document file.
Now clearly, in viewing mode,
you would need to allow
Keynote to choose,
the user to choose
different slides to view.
We can't just automatically undo that.
So that action of changing the
slide or expanding groups of
slides is something that is a great
candidate to be a discardable change.
And a bonus of that is that
if the document is locked,
then the user doesn't have to unlock
the document just to change the slide.
We allow that too.
Another example in a similar kind
of thing is the currently displayed
chart in the Numbers application.
To use discardable changes,
in the same place that you would set
the group name for your undo group,
like undo typing, change slide,
or move shape in Sketch,
you can now set action is discardable,
yes, and NSDocument takes care
of all the rest for you.
If it's not an undoable change,
you can use NSDocument's
update change count mechanism.
You just bitwise or the change
you normally would have done,
usually NSChange done,
with NSChangeDiscardable.
So one more note about versions.
If you don't want to use
the versions browser,
which is integrated into NSDocument,
we have foundation level access
to the list of versions as well.
And that's via a class
called NSFileVersion.
When you use NSFileVersion,
it's important to remember that you
as the caller are responsible for file
coordination and version management.
Let's take a quick look
at some of the API.
To get an array of NSFileVersion
instances for a file,
you call other versions of item at URL.
This is in contrast to
the current version.
You can add a new version of a
file to versions using this method,
add version of item at
URL with contents of URL,
options, error.
You can revert to an old version of a
file using an NSFileVersion instance by
using replace item at URL options error.
And NSFileVersion instances have plenty
of properties about the document,
including the name and modification date,
which can, of course, change over time.
So to show us another demo of how you
can use versions in your application,
I'd like to invite back Kevin.
Thank you.
So, Sketch again.
I showed you earlier how just by
turning on Auto Saving in place,
we gain basic version support for Sketch.
However, there's a couple of things we
can do to improve the experience.
First of all,
notice that when I go into versions,
the tool inspector gets pushed
off the side of the screen.
This provides a clutter-free environment
for the user to browse versions.
However, currently,
AppKit doesn't bring that inspector
back when we come out of versions.
Now,
this may change in the future in AppKit,
but in the meantime,
we want to do the right thing.
Another thing is the window size.
If I happen to resize the window to
something like this for whatever reason,
and the versions doesn't know that
the window size isn't optimal.
And so we end up with the
canvas partially clipped and
a bunch of extra wasted space.
So let's solve these two problems
using the APIs Tony talked about.
Here we are in the
SKT window controller class,
which is also our Windows delegate.
And we can use window delegate APIs.
to know when Version Browser enters,
will enter, or did exit.
In the window will enter
Version Browser delegate method,
we'll check to see if the
palette is currently visible.
and when we exit the version browser,
if it was visible, then we show it again.
Pretty simple.
For the window sizing problem,
we implement the delegate method
window will resize for version
browser with Mac's preferred size,
Mac's allowed size.
and the size that we return from this
method is the size that versions will
resize the window to before entering.
And here we use NSView,
NSScrollView and NSWindow
APIs to determine the proper
optimal size for our document.
So let me show you how these work.
And we see the window resize so that
it fits to the content very nicely.
And when we exit versions,
the tool inspector is brought
back as we would expect.
So these are just some very
simple ways to use these APIs.
There is a lot of potential here for
your own applications to improve the
user experience in versions such as
doing things like hiding user interface
elements that aren't needed like
tool bars or sidebars and so forth.
So that's all for versions.
Now we'll hear about iCloud from Tony.
Kevin, thanks.
Thank you.
So on to iCloud.
and his document is integrated with the
new Cloud Storage feature in many ways.
NSDocument will use the versions
browser to resolve conflicts,
as I mentioned earlier.
And NSDocument's adoption of file
coordination is going to update
the contents of your document
on demand when new things are
synced down from the Cloud.
We're going to briefly cover the
API to move a document to the Cloud and
finding documents in the Cloud.
So to move a document to the cloud,
the APA is not on NSDocument
but on NSFileManager.
There you need to first
find your container.
Each application has their
own Ubiquiti container.
And here it is,
URL for Ubiquiti container identifier.
And once you have it,
you can make a document ubiquitous
simply by calling setUbiquitous
itemAtURL destinationURL.
The itemAtURL parameter will
be the document you're moving,
and the destinationURL should be
someplace in your Ubiquiti container.
Next, to find iCloud documents,
the API is on NSMetadataQuery,
which is our class for integrating
with Spotlight as well.
So there we have a new search scope,
NSMetadataQuery Ubiquitous
Document Scope.
And also you will find some
API and NSURL that's helpful,
including finding out if an
item is ubiquitous or not,
looking at if it's downloaded,
if it's downloading,
the percent that it's downloaded,
and similar keys for uploading.
So to show you another example
of how that works in Sketch,
I'd like to invite up
one last time Kevin.
Thank you again.
So here is another version of Sketch,
which I've modified to
provide cloud integration.
Here in the File menu,
you see there's two new menu items,
Open Cloud Document and Move to Cloud.
So let's go ahead and move the
currently open document to the cloud.
and I'll make another change here that
we will be able to see on the cloud.
and David . Welcome to WWDC.
So now let me switch to another machine.
Okay.
Not really.
But we're really
exercising the APIs here.
And we have the same version
of Sketch running here.
So we'll go to File, Open Cloud Document,
and we can open the document that
we just saved on the other machine.
and let's be daring here and even
make a change on this machine at 2011.
I'll switch back.
And there we see the change is synced
to the original machine as well.
So let's see these APIs that
Tony talked about in action.
In our document subclass,
we override validate menu item
because we want to change what the
move to cloud file menu item says,
depending on whether or not the item
is actually in the cloud already.
We can detect this using
isUbiquitousItemAtURL on NSFileManager.
And if it is ubiquitous,
then we change the title to Remove from
Cloud instead of Move to Cloud.
And we also set some state on the
menu item so that when it's selected,
we know what operation
we're actually performing.
This is implemented in
move to or from cloud.
The key method here is right here.
And as file manager,
set ubiquitous item URL,
destination URL error, as Tony mentioned.
When we're making an item ubiquitous,
or moving it to the cloud,
then we build the destination
URL by using File Manager's URL for
Ubiquity Container Identifier,
passing in the identifier that
belongs to our applications,
in this case, com.apple.sketch.
And documents generally live
in a document subdirectory
inside of the container,
so we append that here.
After making sure that
the directory exists,
we append to that URL the file's name.
Down here,
before we call setUbiquitousItem at URL,
you notice we have some
file coordinator code.
And in the future,
you won't have to do a lot of this code,
but for now,
it's required to make this work.
So I won't cover it in great depth.
But the key thing here
is this method again.
The menu item for finding ubiquitous
documents in the cloud is here
in our skt-appdelicate class.
When the application finishes launching,
we're going to call
startUpdatingCloudDocumentMenu,
which creates an NSMetadata query using
the new ubiquitous document scope.
This causes NS Metadata again
to search the cloud instead of
your local file system for files.
[Transcript missing]
Then we set up observers for
when the results array of
the metadata query changes.
And when we get those notifications,
we will update the Cloud Documents
menu by adding a menu item for
each document that we find,
which in turn, when it's selected,
will open that document.
And that's really all there is to it.
These are the most important
APIs that I've shown you on
NSFileManager and NSMetadataQuery,
but there are the others that
Tony showed you as well for seeing
progress of uploads and downloads
and even purging the document on the
local hard drive without removing
it from the cloud and so forth.
So now let's go back to Tony,
who's going to wrap up for us.
Okay, thanks, Kevin.
That's pretty cool, right?
I mean, it wasn't that difficult,
just a few lines of code,
and we got something
synced across the cloud.
So let's do a quick recap of
what we talked about today.
We really want to help you make
your document-based application
a first-class Lion citizen.
That means adopting Auto Save.
And again, here's the one method you need
to take away from this talk.
Auto Save's in place, return yes.
Try it out, test your app,
and come talk to us in the labs
and tell us how it went for you.
After it's enabled,
you can polish Auto Save by saving
fast and adopting asynchronous saving.
We also talked about versions,
and remember, it's on by default when
you enable Auto Saving,
but you can polish it too by
streamlining the interface in browsing
mode and allowing discardable changes.
And then finally, we looked at iCloud,
and we talked about how to
move documents to the cloud,
how to find documents in the
cloud using NSMetadataQuery,
and then we looked at how you could
find document properties using NSURL.
So for more information,
there's of course Bill Dundee,
our App Frameworks Evangelist.
The documentation and developer
forums are great resources.
And if you've ever
looked at NSDocument.h,
you know that it's a lot of comments.
We measured.
There's 87% comments in that file.
They're designed to tell you everything
about every method in there and
how it works with everything else.
So the documentation, the header files,
our release notes are all great
resources to find out more
information about all the great
new features we've added in Lion.
We have a couple of related sessions.
The first one I already mentioned,
taking advantage of file
coordination in this room right now.
Then also resume and
automatic termination in Lion.
That's Marina, Thursday at 9 a.m.
Those features go with these
like peanut butter and jelly.
So they all work great together
or taste great together in Lion.
So with that, I want to thank you so much
for coming to this talk.
And I'm really looking forward to
seeing what you guys do with Auto Save,
Versions, and iCloud.